adjust log formatting docs + externalize docs re custom fields (#521)
cap-js/docs: node.js/cds-log.md

During development, we want concise, human-readable output in the console, with clickable stack traces in case of errors. You should not be overloaded with information that is additionally obfuscated by a bad rendering. Hence, [console.log()](https://nodejs.org/api/console.html#console_console_log_data_args), that makes use of [util.format()](https://nodejs.org/api/util.html#util_util_format_format_args) out of the box, with raw arguments is a good choice.

The *plain log formatter* does exactly that, prepending the list of arguments with `[<module> -]`. The following screenshot shows the log output for the previous warning and rejection with the plain log formatter.

> ![Plain Formatter Output](./assets/plain-formatter-output.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![The screenshot is explained in the accompanying text.](./assets/plain-formatter-output.png)
```

The plain log formatter is the default formatter in non-production.

## Logging in Production

In production, DevOps typically consume application logs via dashboards such as Kibana or Grafana. Hence, the log output needs to be formatted in a way that enables the respective dashboard technology to optimally support the user, for example, filtering for logs of specific levels, modules, status, etc.

The *JSON log formatter* constructs a loggable object from the passed arguments as well as [cds.context](events#cds-event-context) and the headers of the incoming request (if available).

The JSON log formatter is the default formatter in production.

::: tip
Since `@sap/cds^7.5`, running `cds add kibana-logging` or setting `cds.env.features.kibana_formatter = true` are no longer needed. If you want to opt-out of the JSON formatter in production, set `cds.env.log.format = 'plain'`.
:::

Further, there are two formatting aspects that are activated automatically, if appropriate, and add the following information to the loggable object:
1. Running on Cloud Foundry: `tenant_subdomain`, `CF_INSTANCE_IP` and information from `VCAP_APPLICATION`

> 1. Bound to an instance of the [SAP Application Logging Service for the Cloud Foundry Environment](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service-for-cloud-foundry-environment): `categories` and *custom fields* as described in [SAP Application Logging Service Custom Fields](#als-custom-fields)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Bound to an instance of the [SAP Application Logging Service for the Cloud Foundry Environment](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service-for-cloud-foundry-environment): `categories` and *custom fields* as described in [Custom Fields](#als-custom-fields)
```

The following screenshot shows the log output for the rejection in the previous example with the JSON log formatter including the two aspects.

> ![JSON Formatter Output](assets/json-formatter-output.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![The screenshot is explained in the accompanying text.](assets/json-formatter-output.png)
```

::: warning

> The SAP Application Logging Service offers [differnt plans with different quotas](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/service-plans-and-quotas). Please make sure the plan you use is sufficient, i.e., no logs are being dropped (this information is available in Kibana). As soon as logs are dropped, you cannot reliably assess what is going on in your app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SAP Application Logging Service offers [different plans with different quotas](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/service-plans-and-quotas). Please make sure the plan you use is sufficient, that is, no logs are being dropped so that the information is available in Kibana. As soon as logs are dropped, you cannot reliably assess what is going on in your app.
```

:::

### Header Masking

> Some header values shall not appear in logs, for example when pertaining to authorization. Config `cds.env.log.mask_headers = [...]` allows to specify a list of matchers for which the header value shall be masked (that is, printed as `***`). The default config is `['/authorization/i', '/cookie/i']`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some header values shall not appear in logs, for example when pertaining to authorization. Configuration option `cds.env.log.mask_headers = [...]` allows to specify a list of matchers for which the header value shall be masked. Masked values are printed as `***`. The default config is `['/authorization/i', '/cookie/i']`.
```

### Custom Fields { #als-custom-fields }

> To show additional information (that is, information that is not included in the [list of supported fields](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/supported-fields) of the SAP Application Logging Service), it needs to be provided as custom fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Information that is not included in the [list of supported fields](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/supported-fields) of the SAP Application Logging Service can be shown as additional information. This information needs to be provided as custom fields.
```

> By default, the JSON formatter uses the following custom fields configuration (configurable via [cds.env](cds-env)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the JSON formatter uses the following custom fields configuration, which is configurable using [cds.env](cds-env#cds-env):
```

> ```js
> {
>   log: {
>     als_custom_fields: { //> <key>: <index>
>       query: 0, //> sql
>       target: 1, details: 2 //> generic validations
>     }
>   }
> }
> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```jsonc
{
  "log": {
    "als_custom_fields": { //> <key>: <index>
      "query": 0, //> sql
      "target": 1, "details": 2 //> generic validations
    }
  }
}
```
```

> Up to 20 such custom fields can be provided using this mechanism. The advantage of this approach is that the additional information can be indexed. The drawback, next to it being cumbersome, is that the indexes should be kept stable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up to 20 such custom fields can be provided using this mechanism. The advantage of this approach is that the additional information can be indexed. Besides being a manual task, it has the drawback that the indexes should be kept stable.
```

::: details Background

> The SAP Application Logging Service requires the following formatting of custom field content inside the JSON object that shall be logged:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SAP Application Logging Service requires the following formatting of custom field content inside the JSON object that is logged:
```

1. Running on Cloud Foundry: `tenant_subdomain`, `CF_INSTANCE_IP` and information from `VCAP_APPLICATION`
1. Bound to an instance of the [SAP Application Logging Service for the Cloud Foundry Environment](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service-for-cloud-foundry-environment): `categories` and *custom fields* as described in [SAP Application Logging Service Custom Fields](#als-custom-fields)

The following screenshot shows the log output for the rejection in the previous example with the JSON log formatter including the two aspects.

![JSON Formatter Output](assets/json-formatter-output.png)

::: warning
The SAP Application Logging Service offers [differnt plans with different quotas](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/service-plans-and-quotas). Please make sure the plan you use is sufficient, i.e., no logs are being dropped (this information is available in Kibana). As soon as logs are dropped, you cannot reliably assess what is going on in your app.
:::

> 
> https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/service-plans-and-quotas

Author: ```suggestion
```

The following screenshot shows the log output for the rejection in the previous example with the JSON log formatter including the two aspects.

![JSON Formatter Output](assets/json-formatter-output.png)

::: warning
The SAP Application Logging Service offers [differnt plans with different quotas](https://help.sap.com/docs/application-logging-service/sap-application-logging-service/service-plans-and-quotas). Please make sure the plan you use is sufficient, i.e., no logs are being dropped (this information is available in Kibana). As soon as logs are dropped, you cannot reliably assess what is going on in your app.
:::

### Header Masking

Some header values shall not appear in logs, for example when pertaining to authorization. Config `cds.env.log.mask_headers = [...]` allows to specify a list of matchers for which the header value shall be masked (that is, printed as `***`). The default config is `['/authorization/i', '/cookie/i']`.

> ### *SAP Application Logging Service Custom Fields* { #als-custom-fields }

Author: @renejeglinsky 

how can i change this title in the right-hand toc to "Custom Fields"?
![Screenshot 2023-11-29 at 13 12 45](https://github.com/cap-js/docs/assets/30337871/d556825d-f978-4bd1-aff3-171afc6ea6a2)

Reviewer: You have to make this the title :) No way to have a "shorty" anymore. Maybe "Custom Fields in SAP Application Logging Service" would end up with the service name being truncated. Could work, right?

Reviewer: Or leave the service out and make it clear in the text that itÄs about that service.

Author: > No way to have a "shorty" anymore.

that's too bad. i think i'll go for option 2 to avoid any truncation, thanks.

Author: after review, i think it's already made clear. :)

> ![Kibana-friendly Formatter Output](assets/kibana-formatter-output.png){adapt}

Author: we need to rework the guide regarding:
- kibana vs als
- new config + auto-config via aspects

#### *Including Custom Fields (Beta)*

To show additional information (that is, information that is not included in the [list of supported fields](https://help.sap.com/docs/APPLICATION_LOGGING/ee8e8a203e024bbb8c8c2d03fce527dc/48b726c3f7534285b05eb31b5b7dc14d.html) of the SAP Application Logging Service), it needs to be provided in the following form:

```js
{
  [...],
  '#cf': {
    strings: [
      { k: '<key>', v: '<value>', i: <index> },
      [...]
    ]
  }
}
```

The information is rendered as follows:

```txt
custom.string.key0: <key>
custom.string.value0: <value>
```

Up to 20 custom fields can be provided using this mechanism. The advantage of this approach is that the additional information can be indexed. The drawback, next to it being cumbersome, is that the indexes should be kept stable.

> By default, the Kibana-friendly formatter uses the following custom fields configuration (configurable via [cds.env](cds-env)):

Author: ```suggestion
By default, the JSON formatter uses the following custom fields configuration (configurable via [cds.env](cds-env)):
```

```js
{
  log: {

>     kibana_custom_fields: { // > <key>: <index>

Author: ```suggestion
    als_custom_fields: { // > <key>: <index>
```

      // sql
      query: 0,
      // generic validations

>       target: 1,
>       details: 2

Author: ```suggestion
      target: 1, details: 2
```

    }
  }
}
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Note: Before `@sap/cds^7.5`, the configuration property was called `kibana_custom_fields`. As Kibana is the dashboard technology and the custom fields are actually a feature of Application Logging Service, we changed the name to `als_custom_fields`.  `kibana_custom_fields` is supported until `@sap/cds^8`.

```
